Prostate Cancer Screening (PDQ®)–Patient Version On This Page What Is Screening? General Information About Prostate Cancer Prostate Cancer Screening Risks of Prostate Cancer Screening About This PDQ Summary What Is Screening? Go to Health Professional Version Screening is looking for cancer before a person has any symptoms . This can help find cancer at an early stage . When abnormal tissue or cancer is found early, it may be easier to treat. By the time symptoms appear, cancer may have begun to spread. Scientists are trying to better understand which people are more likely to get certain types of cancer. They also study the things we do and the things around us to see if they cause cancer. This information helps doctors recommend who should be screened for cancer, which screening tests should be used, and how often the tests should be done. It is important to remember that your doctor does not necessarily think you have cancer if he or she suggests a screening test. Screening tests are given when you have no cancer symptoms. Screening tests may be repeated on a regular basis. If a screening test result is abnormal, you may need to have more tests done to find out if you have cancer. These are called diagnostic tests . General Information About Prostate Cancer Key Points Prostate cancer is a disease in which malignant (cancer) cells form in the tissues of the prostate. Prostate cancer is the most common nonskin cancer among men in the United States. Different factors increase or decrease the risk of developing prostate cancer. Prostate cancer is a disease in which malignant (cancer) cells form in the tissues of the prostate. The prostate is a gland in the male reproductive system . It lies just below the bladder (the organ that collects and empties urine ) and in front of the rectum (the lower part of the intestine ). It is about the size of a walnut and surrounds part of the urethra (the tube that empties urine from the bladder). The prostate gland makes fluid that is part of the semen . Enlarge Anatomy of the male reproductive and urinary systems showing the ureters, bladder, prostate gland, urethra, penis, testicles, and other organs. As men age, the prostate may get bigger. A bigger prostate may block the flow of urine from the bladder and cause problems with sexual function. This condition is called benign prostatic hyperplasia (BPH). BPH is not cancer , but surgery may be needed to correct it. The symptoms of BPH or of other problems in the prostate may be similar to symptoms of prostate cancer . Enlarge Normal prostate and benign prostatic hyperplasia (BPH). A normal prostate does not block the flow of urine from the bladder. An enlarged prostate presses on the bladder and urethra and blocks the flow of urine. Other PDQ summaries containing information related to prostate cancer include: Prostate Cancer Prevention Prostate Cancer Treatment Prostate cancer is the most common nonskin cancer among men in the United States. Prostate cancer is most common in older men. In the United States, about one out of every eight men will be diagnosed with prostate cancer. Most men diagnosed with this disease do not die from it. Prostate cancer causes more deaths in men than any other cancer except lung cancer . Prostate cancer occurs more often in Black men than in White men. Black men with prostate cancer are more likely to die from the disease than White men with prostate cancer. Different factors increase or decrease the risk of developing prostate cancer. Anything that increases your chance of getting a disease is called a risk factor . Anything that decreases your chance of getting a disease is called a protective factor . To learn more about risk factors and protective factors for prostate cancer, visit Prostate Cancer Prevention . Prostate Cancer Screening Key Points Tests are used to screen for different types of cancer when a person does not have symptoms. There is no standard or routine screening test for prostate cancer. Digital rectal exam Prostate-specific antigen test A prostate cancer gene 3 (PCA3) RNA test may be used for certain patients. Screening tests for prostate cancer are being studied in clinical trials. Tests are used to screen for different types of cancer when a person does not have symptoms. Scientists study screening tests to find those with the fewest harms and most benefits. Cancer screening trials also are meant to show whether early detection (finding cancer before it causes symptoms ) helps a person live longer or decreases a person's chance of dying from the disease. For some types of cancer, the chance of recovery is better if the disease is found and treated at an early stage . There is no standard or routine screening test for prostate cancer. Although there are no standard or routine screening tests for prostate cancer , the following tests are being used or studied to screen for it: Digital rectal exam Digital rectal exam (DRE) is an exam of the rectum . The doctor or nurse inserts a lubricated , gloved finger into the lower part of the rectum to feel the prostate for lumps or anything else that seems unusual, such as an enlarged prostate. Enlarge Digital rectal exam (DRE). The doctor inserts a gloved, lubricated finger into the rectum and feels the rectum, anus, and prostate (in males) to check for anything abnormal. Prostate-specific antigen test A prostate-specific antigen (PSA) test is a test that measures the level of PSA in the blood . PSA is a substance made mostly by the prostate that may be found in an increased amount in the blood of men who have prostate cancer. The level of PSA may also be high in men who have an infection or inflammation of the prostate or benign prostatic hyperplasia (BPH; an enlarged, but noncancerous, prostate). A PSA test or a DRE may be able to detect prostate cancer at an early stage, but it is not clear whether early detection and treatment decrease the risk of dying from prostate cancer. Studies are being done to find ways to make PSA testing more accurate for early cancer detection. A prostate cancer gene 3 (PCA3) RNA test may be used for certain patients. If a man had a high PSA level and a biopsy of the prostate did not show cancer and the PSA level remains high after the biopsy, a PCA3 RNA test may be done. This test measures the amount of PCA3 RNA in the urine after a DRE. If the PCA3 RNA level is higher than normal, another prostate biopsy may be needed to help diagnose prostate cancer. Screening tests for prostate cancer are being studied in clinical trials. Information about clinical trials supported by NCI can be found on NCI’s clinical trials search webpage. Clinical trials supported by other organizations can be found on the ClinicalTrials.gov website. Risks of Prostate Cancer Screening Key Points Screening tests have risks. The risks of prostate cancer screening include: Finding prostate cancer that may never cause symptoms or become life threatening. Complications from a follow-up biopsy can occur. False-negative test results can occur. False-positive test results can occur. Screening tests have risks. Decisions about screening tests can be difficult. Not all screening tests are helpful, and most have risks. Before having any screening test, you may want to discuss the test with your doctor. It is important to know the risks of the test and whether it has been proven to reduce the risk of dying from cancer . The risks of prostate cancer screening include: Finding prostate cancer that may never cause symptoms or become life threatening. Screening may not improve your health or help you live longer if you have cancer that has already spread to the area outside of the prostate or to other places in your body. Some prostate cancers never cause symptoms or become life-threatening, but if found by a screening test, the cancer may be treated. Finding these cancers is called overdiagnosis . It is not known if treatment of these cancers would help you live longer than if no treatment were given. Treatments for prostate cancer , such as radical prostatectomy and radiation therapy , may have long-term side effects in many men. The most common side effects are erectile dysfunction and urinary incontinence . Some studies of patients with newly diagnosed prostate cancer showed these patients had a higher risk of death from cardiovascular (heart and blood vessel ) disease or suicide . The risk was greatest in the first weeks or months after diagnosis . Complications from a follow-up biopsy can occur. If a PSA test is higher than normal, a biopsy of the prostate may be done. Complications from a biopsy of the prostate may include fever , pain, blood in the urine or semen , and urinary tract infection . Even if a biopsy shows that a patient does not have prostate cancer, he may worry more about developing prostate cancer in the future. Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI)−guided biopsy is being studied in the diagnosis of prostate cancer, either in place of, or in addition to, standard prostate needle biopsy . False-negative test results can occur. Screening test results may appear to be normal even though prostate cancer is present. A man who receives a false-negative test result (one that shows there is no cancer when there really is) may delay seeking medical care even if he has symptoms. False-positive test results can occur. Screening test results may appear to be abnormal even though no cancer is present. A false-positive test result (one that shows there is cancer when there really isn't) can cause anxiety and is usually followed by more tests and procedures (such as a biopsy), which also have risks. Your doctor can advise you about your risk for prostate cancer and your need for screening tests.