Skin Cancer Screening (PDQ®)–Patient Version On This Page What Is Screening? General Information About Skin Cancer Skin Cancer Screening Risks of Skin Cancer Screening About This PDQ Summary What Is Screening? Go to Health Professional Version Screening is looking for cancer before a person has any symptoms . This can help find cancer at an early stage . When abnormal tissue or cancer is found early, it may be easier to treat. By the time symptoms appear, cancer may have begun to spread. Scientists are trying to better understand which people are more likely to get certain types of cancer. They also study the things we do and the things around us to see if they cause cancer. This information helps doctors recommend who should be screened for cancer, which screening tests should be used, and how often the tests should be done. It is important to remember that your doctor does not necessarily think you have cancer if he or she suggests a screening test. Screening tests are given when you have no cancer symptoms. If a screening test result is abnormal, you may need to have more tests done to find out if you have cancer. These are called diagnostic tests . General Information About Skin Cancer Key Points Skin cancer is a disease in which malignant (cancer) cells form in the tissues of the skin. Skin cancer is the most common cancer in the United States. Different factors increase or decrease the risk of skin cancer. Skin cancer is a disease in which malignant (cancer) cells form in the tissues of the skin. The skin is the body's largest organ . It protects against heat, sunlight, injury, and infection . Skin also helps control body temperature and stores water, fat, and vitamin D . The skin has several layers, but the two main layers are the epidermis (top or outer layer) and the dermis (lower or inner layer). Skin cancer begins in the epidermis, which is made up of three kinds of cells : Squamous cells : Thin, flat cells that form the top layer of the epidermis. Cancer that forms in the skin's squamous cells is called squamous cell carcinoma of the skin . Basal cells : Round cells under the squamous cells. Cancer that forms in basal cells is called basal cell carcinoma . Melanocytes : Found in the lower part of the epidermis, these cells make melanin , the pigment that gives skin its natural color. When skin is exposed to the sun, melanocytes make more pigment and cause the skin to tan, or darken. Cancer that forms in melanocytes is called melanoma . Enlarge Anatomy of the skin, showing the epidermis, dermis, and subcutaneous tissue. Skin cancer is the most common cancer in the United States. There are two main types of skin cancer: nonmelanoma or keratinocyte carcinoma , which includes: squamous cell carcinoma (SCC) basal cell carcinoma melanoma Basal cell carcinoma and squamous cell carcinoma of the skin, also called nonmelanoma skin cancer or keratinocyte carcinoma, are the most common forms of skin cancer. Most basal cell and squamous cell skin cancers can be cured . Melanoma is more likely to spread to nearby tissues and other parts of the body and can be harder to cure. Melanoma is easier to cure if the tumor is found before it spreads to the dermis (inner layer of skin). Melanoma is less likely to cause death when it is found and treated early. Enlarge Anatomy of the skin, showing the epidermis, dermis, and subcutaneous tissue. Melanocytes are in the layer of basal cells at the deepest part of the epidermis. In the United States, about 3 million people are diagnosed with nonmelanoma skin cancer each year. Rates of nonmelanoma skin cancer have been increasing, possibly because greater public awareness has led to higher rates of screening exams, self-exams, and detection of these skin cancers. Since the early 2000s, the rate of melanoma cases in adults younger than 50 years has held steady in women, but decreased by about 1% per year in men. In adults aged 50 years and older, the rate of melanoma cases has held steady in men, but increased by about 3% per year in women in recent years. From 2013 to 2022, the number of deaths from melanoma decreased by about 3% per year in men and 4% per year in women. The rate of melanoma cases in children and adolescents increased until 2001. However, between 2001 and 2022, the yearly rates of melanoma in these age groups decreased slightly. Other PDQ summaries containing information related to skin cancer include: Skin Cancer Prevention Skin Cancer Treatment Melanoma Treatment Genetics of Skin Cancer Childhood Melanoma Childhood Basal Cell Carcinoma and Squamous Cell Carcinoma of the Skin Different factors increase or decrease the risk of skin cancer. Anything that increases your chance of getting a disease is called a risk factor . Anything that decreases your chance of getting a disease is called a protective factor . For information about risk and protective factors for skin cancer, visit Skin Cancer Prevention . Skin Cancer Screening Key Points Tests are used to screen for different types of cancer when a person does not have symptoms. Screening for skin cancer may include examination by both the patient and the health care provider. Screening tests for skin cancer are being studied in clinical trials. Tests are used to screen for different types of cancer when a person does not have symptoms. Scientists study screening tests to find those with the fewest harms and most benefits. Cancer screening trials also are meant to show whether early detection (finding cancer before it causes symptoms ) helps a person live longer or decreases a person's chance of dying from the disease. For some types of cancer, the chance of recovery is better if the disease is found and treated at an early stage . There is not enough evidence to know if screening the population for skin cancer lowers the rates of death from the disease. Screening for skin cancer may include examination by both the patient and the health care provider. A visual self-exam by the patient and a clinical examination by the health care provider may be used to screen for skin cancer. During a skin exam a doctor or nurse checks the skin for moles , birthmarks, or other pigmented areas that look abnormal in color, size, shape, or texture. Skin exams to screen for skin cancer have not been shown to decrease the number of deaths from the disease. Regular skin checks by a doctor are important for people who have already had skin cancer. If you are checking your skin and find a worrisome change, you should report it to your doctor. If an area on the skin looks abnormal, a biopsy is usually done. The doctor will remove as much of the suspicious tissue as possible with a local excision . A pathologist then looks at the tissue under a microscope to check for cancer cells. Because it is sometimes difficult to tell if a skin growth is benign (not cancer) or malignant (cancer), you may want to have the biopsy sample checked by a second pathologist. Most melanomas in the skin can be seen by the naked eye. Usually, melanoma grows for a long time under the top layer of skin (the epidermis ) but does not grow into the deeper layer (the dermis ). This allows time for skin cancer to be found early. Melanoma is easier to cure if it is found before it spreads. Mobile apps that evaluate skin lesions to detect skin cancer and malignant melanoma have been developed. However, these apps require further study in large-scale testing programs to find out if they are accurate and useful for skin cancer screening. Screening tests for skin cancer are being studied in clinical trials. Information about clinical trials supported by NCI can be found on NCI’s clinical trials search webpage. Clinical trials supported by other organizations can be found on the ClinicalTrials.gov website. Risks of Skin Cancer Screening Key Points Screening tests have risks. The risks of skin cancer screening tests include: Finding skin cancer does not always improve health or help you live longer. False-negative test results can occur. False-positive test results can occur. A biopsy may cause scarring. Screening tests have risks. Decisions about screening tests can be difficult. Not all screening tests are helpful and most have risks. Before having any screening test, you may want to discuss the test with your doctor. It is important to know the risks of the test and whether it has been proven to reduce the risk of dying from cancer. The risks of skin cancer screening tests include: Finding skin cancer does not always improve health or help you live longer. Screening may not improve your health or help you live longer if you have advanced skin cancer . Some cancers never cause symptoms or become life-threatening, but if found by a screening test, the cancer may be treated. Treatments for cancer may have serious side effects . False-negative test results can occur. Screening test results may appear to be normal even though cancer is present. A person who receives a false-negative test result (one that shows there is no cancer when there really is) may delay getting medical care even if there are symptoms. False-positive test results can occur. Screening test results may appear to be abnormal even though no cancer is present. A false-positive test result (one that shows there is cancer when there really isn't) can cause anxiety and is usually followed by more tests (such as a biopsy ), which also have risks. A biopsy may cause scarring. When a skin biopsy is done, the doctor will try to leave the smallest scar possible, but there is a risk of scarring and infection . Talk to your doctor about your risk for skin cancer and your need for screening tests.