Disease heterogeneity and personalized prognosis in myeloproliferative neoplasms Abstract
Background
Myeloproliferative neoplasms (MPN), comprising polycythemia vera, essential thrombocythemia and myelofibrosis, are chronic hematological malignancies with variable progression rates. Genomic characterization of MPN patients offers the potential for personalised diagnosis, risk stratification and management.
Methods
We sequenced coding exons from 69 myeloid cancer genes in 2035 MPN patients, comprehensively annotating driver mutations and copy number changes. We developed a genomic classification for MPNs and multistage prognostic models for predicting individual patient outcomes. Classification and prognostic models were validated on an external cohort.
Results
33 genes carried driver mutations in >4 patients, with JAK2, CALR or MPL mutations being the sole abnormality in 45% patients. The number of driver mutations increased with age and advanced disease. Driver mutations, germline polymorphisms and demographic variables independently predicted whether patients were diagnosed with essential thrombocythemia versus polycythemia vera, and chronic phase disease versus myelofibrosis. We defined 8 genomic subgroups, exhibiting distinct clinical phenotypes, including diagnostic blood counts, risk of leukemic transformation and event-free survival. Integrating 63 clinical and genomic variables, we created prognostic models capable of generating personally-tailored predictions of clinical outcomes in chronic phase MPN or myelofibrosis. Predicted and observed outcomes correlated well using internal cross-validation and an independent external cohort. Even within individual categories of existing prognostic schemas, our models substantially improved predictive accuracy.
Conclusions
Comprehensive genomic characterization identifies distinct genetic subgroups and provides an MPN classification based on causal biological mechanisms. Integration of genomic data with clinical parameters enables personalised predictions of patient outcome and will support management of MPN patients.