Genomic profiling for clinical decision making in myeloid neoplasms and acute leukemia Abstract
Myeloid neoplasms and acute leukemias derive from the clonal expansion of hematopoietic cells driven by somatic gene mutations. Although assessment of morphology plays a crucial role in the diagnostic evaluation of patients with these malignancies, genomic characterization has become increasingly important for accurate diagnosis, risk assessment, and therapeutic decision making. Conventional cytogenetics, a comprehensive and unbiased method for assessing chromosomal abnormalities, has been the mainstay of genomic testing over the past several decades and remains relevant today. However, more recent advances in sequencing technology have increased our ability to detect somatic mutations through the use of targeted gene panels, whole-exome sequencing, whole-genome sequencing, and whole-transcriptome sequencing or RNA sequencing. In patients with myeloid neoplasms, whole-genome sequencing represents a potential replacement for both conventional cytogenetic and sequencing approaches, providing rapid and accurate comprehensive genomic profiling. DNA sequencing methods are used not only for detecting somatically acquired gene mutations but also for identifying germline gene mutations associated with inherited predisposition to hematologic neoplasms. The 2022 International Consensus Classification of myeloid neoplasms and acute leukemias makes extensive use of genomic data. The aim of this report is to help physicians and laboratorians implement genomic testing for diagnosis, risk stratification, and clinical decision making and illustrates the potential of genomic profiling for enabling personalized medicine in patients with hematologic neoplasms. Abstract
Complementing the recently published Blood articles outlining the 2022 International Consensus Classifications for hematological malignancies (Vol. 140, Issue 11), this pair of Special Reports illustrates how molecular pathology can be applied to precision medicine. de Leval and colleagues summarize the potential of DNA sequencing of tumors and cell-free plasma, epigenetic profiling, and single-cell analyses to inform clinical decision-making about diagnosis, prognosis, and treatment for patients with lymphoid neoplasms. Similarly, Duncavage and colleagues cover genomic profiling for myeloid neoplasms and the acute leukemias, focusing principally on somatic changes but also with emphasis on the emerging importance of germline gene mutations in certain diseases. Both articles provide up-to-date references for how to apply genomic information to practice.